This is the Results Article for CTN-0035-Ot. Illicit drug users have a high prevalence of HCV and represent the majority of newly infected persons in the U.S. Despite the availability of effective HCV treatment, few drug users have been evaluated or treated for HCV. Racial and ethnic minorities have a higher incidence and prevalence of HCV and higher HCV-related mortality. Factors contributing to poor engagement in care are incompletely understood. In this study, National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network protocol CTN-0035-Ot ("Access to HIV and Hepatitis Screening and Care Among Ethnic Minority Drug Users In and Out of Drug Treatment"), fourteen mixed-gender focus groups of either African American or Latino/a drug users (N=95) discussed barriers to HCV testing and treatment. Themes were identified through content analysis of focus group discussions. Many drug users were tested for HCV in settings where they were receiving care. Outside of these settings, most were unaware of voluntary test sites. After testing HCV positive, drug users reported not receiving clear messages regarding the meaning of a positive HCV test, the impact of HCV infection, or appropriate next steps including HCV clinical evaluations. Many drug users perceived treatment as unimportant because they lacked symptoms, health care providers minimized the severity of the diagnosis, or providers did not recommend treatment. Mistrust of the motivations of health care providers was cited as a barrier to pursuing treatment. Social networks or social interactions were a source of HCV-related information and were influential in shaping drug users perceptions of treatment and its utility.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0047. Medical treatment settings such as emergency departments (EDs) present important opportunities to address problematic substance use. Currently, EDs do not typically intervene beyond acute medical stabilization. This study aimed to contrast the effects of a brief intervention with telephone boosters (BI-B) with those of screening, assessment, and referral to treatment (SAR) and minimal screening only (MSO) among drug-using ED patients. Between October 2010 and February 2012, 1285 adult ED patients from 6 US academic hospitals, who scored 3 or greater on the 10-item Drug Abuse Screening Test (indicating moderate to severe problems related to drug use) and who were currently using drugs, were randomized to MSO (n=431), SAR (n=427), or BI-B (n=427). Follow-up assessment were conducted at 3, 6, and 12 months by blinded interviewers. Following screening, MSO participants received only an informational pamphlet; SAR participants received assessment plus referral to addiction treatment if indicated, and BI-B participants received assessment and referral as in SAR, plus a manual-guided counseling session based on motivational interviewing principles and up to 2 "booster" sessions by telephone during the month following the ED visit. Outcomes evaluated at follow-up visits included self-reported days using the patient-defined primary problem drug, days using any drug, days of heavy drinking, and drug use based on analysis of hair samples. The primary outcome was self-reported days of use of the patient-defined primary problem drug during the 30-day period preceding the 3-month follow-up.Follow-up rates were 89%, 86%, and 81% at 3, 6, and 12 months, respectively. There were no significant differences between groups in self-reported days using the primary drug, days using any drug, or heavy drinking days at 3, 6, or 12 months. At the 3-month follow-up, participants in the SAR group had a higher rate of hair samples positive for their primary drug of abuse (265 of 280, 95%) than did participants in the MSO group (253 or 287, 88%) or the BI-B group (244 of 275, 89%). Hair analysis differences between groups at other time points were not significant.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0049. Substance use is a major driver of the HIV epidemic and is associated with poor HIV care outcomes. Patient navigation (care coordination with case management) and the use of financial incentives for achieving predetermined outcomes are interventions increasingly promoted to engage patients in substance use disorders treatment and HIV care, but there is little evidence for their efficacy in improving HIV-1 viral suppression rates. This study aimed to assess the effect of a structured patient navigation intervention with or without financial incentives to improve HIV-1 viral suppression rates among patients with elevated HIV-1 viral loads and substance use recruited as hospital inpatients. From July 2012 - January 2014, 801 patients with HIV infection and substance use from 11 hospitals across the United States were randomly assigned to receive patient navigation alone (n=266), patient navigation plus financial incentives (n=271), or treatment as usual (n=264). HIV-1 plasma viral load was measured at baseline and at 6 and 12 months. Patient navigation included up to 11 sessions of care coordination with case management and motivational interviewing techniques over 6 months. Financial incentives (up to $1160) were provided for achieving targeted behaviors aimed at reducing substance use, increasing engagement in HIV care, and improving HIV outcomes. Treatment as usual was the standard practice at each hospital for linking hospitalized patients to outpatient HIV care and substance use disorders treatment. The primary outcome was HIV viral suppression (less than or equal to 200 copies/mL) relative to viral nonsuppression or death at the 12-month follow-up. Of 801 patients randomized, 261 (32.6%) were women (mean [SD] age, 44.6 years [10 years]). There were no differences in rates of HIV viral suppression versus nonsuppression or death among the 3 groups at 12 months. Eighty-five of 249 patients (34.1%) in the usual-treatment group experienced treatment success compared with 89 of 249 patients (35.7%) in the navigation-only gruop, for a treatment difference of 1.6%, and compared with 98 of 254 patients (38.6%) in the navigation-plus-incentives group, for a treatment difference of 4.5%. The treatment difference between the navigation-only and navigation-plus-incentives group was -2.8%.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0059. Substance use, a leading cause of illness and death, is underidentified in medical practice. The Tobacco, Alcohol, Prescription Medication, and Other Substance Use (TAPS) tool was developed to address the need for a brief screening and assessment instrument that includes all commonly used substances and fits into clinical workflows. The goal of this multisite study conducted within the NIDA Clinical Trials Network, CTN-0059, was to assess the performance of the TAPS tool in primary care patients by comparing it with a reference standard measure, the modified World Mental Health Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), which measures problem use and substance use disorder (SUD). The study was conducted at 5 adult primary care clinics with 2000 adult patients consecutively recruited from clinic waiting areas. Results found that interviewer- and self-administered versions of the TAPS tool had similar diagnostic characteristics. For identifying problem use (at a cutoff of 1+), the TAPS tool had a sensitivity of 0.93 (95%CI, 0.90 to 0.95) and specificity of 0.87 (CI, 0.85 to 0.89) for tobacco and a sensitivity of 0.74 (CI, 0.70 to 0.78) and specificity of 0.79 (CI, 0.76 to 0.81) for alcohol. For problem use of illicit and prescription drugs, sensitivity ranged from 0.82 (CI, 0.76 to 0.87) for marijuana to 0.63 (CI, 0.47 to 0.78) for sedatives; specificity was 0.93 or higher. For identifying any SUD (at a cutoff of 2+), sensitivity was lower. Limitations of this study included the low prevalence of some drug classes, leading to poor precision in some estimates. Also, research assistants were not blinded to participants' TAPS tool responses when they administered the CIDI.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0009. Nicotine dependence is highly prevalent among drug- and alcohol-dependent patients. A multisite clinical trial of smoking cessation (SC) treatment (CTN-0009) was performed at outpatient community-based substance abuse rehabilitation programs affiliated with the National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network. Cigarette smokers (N = 225) from five methadone maintenance programs and two drug and alcohol dependence treatment programs were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either (1) SC treatment as an adjunct to substance abuse treatment-as-usual (TAU) or (2) substance abuse TAU. Smoking cessation treatment consisted of 1 week of group counseling before the target quit date and 8 weeks of group counseling plus transdermal nicotine patch treatment (21 mg/day for Weeks 1–6 and 14 mg/day for Weeks 7 and 8) after the target quit date. Smoking abstinence rates in SC, 10%–11% during treatment and 5%–6% at the 13- and 26-week follow-up visits, were significantly better than those in TAU during treatment (p < .01). In addition, SC was associated with significantly greater reductions as compared with TAU in cigarettes smoked per day (75% reduction, p < .001), exhaled carbon monoxide levels (p < .001), cigarette craving (p < .05), and nicotine withdrawal (p < .05). Smoking cessation did not differ from TAU on rates of retention in substance abuse treatment, abstinence from primary substance of abuse, and craving for primary substance of abuse. Compliance with SC treatment, moderate at best, was positively associated with smoking abstinence rates.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0011. The TELE study (protocol CTN-0011) examined the feasibility and potential efficacy of phone calls to patients after discharge from short-term inpatient and residential substance abuse treatment programs to encourage compliance with continuing care plans. After review of their continuing care plans, 339 patients from four programs were randomized either to receive calls or have no planned contact. Ninety-two percent of patients randomized to receive calls received at least one call. No difference was found between groups in self-reported attendance at one or more outpatient counseling sessions after discharge (p = .89). When program records of all participants were examined, those receiving calls had a greater likelihood of documented attendance (48%) than those not called (37%). Results were not statistically significant (p < .003) because of the Hochberg correction for multiple tests.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0003. The purpose of CTN-0003 was to compare effects of a short or long taper schedule after buprenorphine stabilization on participant outcomes as measured by opioid-free urine tests at the end of each taper period. This multi-site study sponsored by NIDA's National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network was conducted from 2003-2005 to compare two taper conditions (7 days and 28 days). Data were collected at weekly clinic visits through the end of the taper periods, and at 1-month and 3-month post-taper follow-up visits. The intervention involved non-blinded dosing with Suboxone during the 1-month stabilization phase, including three weeks of flexible dosing as determined appropriate by the study physicians. A fixed dose was required for the final week before beginning the taper phase. Measurements included the percentage of participants in each taper group providing urine samples free of illicit opioids at the end of the taper and at follow-up. At the end of the taper, 44% of the 7-day taper group (n=255) provided opioid-free urine speciments compared to 30% of the 28-day taper group (N=261; p=0.0007). There were no differences at the 1- and 3-month follow-up (7 day = 18% and 12%; 28 day = 18% and 13%, for 1 and 3 months, respectively). Conclusions: For individuals terminating buprenorphine pharmacotherapy for opioid dependence, there appears to be no advantage in prolonging the duration of taper.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0010. The usual treatment for opioid-addicted youth is detoxification and counseling. However, extended medication-assisted therapy may be more helpful. National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network study CTN-0010 evaluated the efficacy of continuing buprenorphine-naloxone for 12 weeks versus detoxification for opioid-addicted youth. The CTN-0010 clinical trial, held at six community treatment programs from July 2003 to December 2006, included 152 patients aged 15 to 21 years who were randomized to 12 weeks of buprenorphine-naloxone or a 14-day taper (detox). Patients in the 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone group were prescribed up to 24 mg per day for 9 weeks and then tapered to week 12; patients in the detox group were prescribed up to 14 mg a day and then tapered to day 14. All were offered weekly individual and group counseling. The main outcome measure was opioid-positive urine test results at weeks 4, 8, and 12. The number of patients younger than 18 years was too small to analyze separately, but overall, patients in the detox group had higher proportions of opioid-positive urine test results at weeks 4 and 8 but not at week 12. At week 4, 59 detox patients had positive results versus 58 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone patients. At week 8, 53 detox patients had positive results versus 52 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone patients. At week 12, 53 detox patients had positive results versus 49 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone patients. By week 12, 16 of 78 detox patients (20.5%) remained in treatment vs. 52 of 74 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone patients (70%). During weeks 1 through 12, patients in the 12-week buprenorphine/naloxone group reported less opioid use, less injecting, and less nonstudy addiction treatment. High levels of opioid use occurred in both groups at follow-up. Four of 83 patients who tested negative for hepatitis C at baseline were positive for hepatitis C at week 12.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0021. Hispanic individuals are underrepresented in clinical and research populations and are often excluded from clinical trials in the United States. Hence, there are few data on the effectiveness of most empirically validated therapies for Hispanic substance users. The authors conducted a multisite randomized trial in the National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network (CTN) comparing the effectiveness of three individual sessions of motivational enhancement therapy with that of three individual sessions of counseling as usual on treatment retention and frequency of substance use (protocol NIDA-CTN-0021); all assessment and treatment sessions were conducted in Spanish among 405 individuals seeking treatment for any type of current substance use. Treatment exposure was good, with 66% of participants completing all three protocol sessions. Although both interventions resulted in reductions in substance use during the 4-week therapy phase, there were no significant Treatment Condition x Time interactions nor Site x Treatment Condition interactions.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0017. Protocol CTN-0017, "HIV and HCV Prevention in Drug Treatment Settings" was a study of 632 drug injectors that tested three interventions to reduce drug and sex risk behaviors. Participants were randomized to (a) a two-session, HIV/HCV counseling and education (C&E) model added to treatment as usual (TAU), (b) a one-session therapeutic alliance (TA) intervention conducted by outpatient counselors to facilitate treatment entry plus TAU, or (c) TAU. Significant reductions in drug and sex risk behaviors occurred for all three conditions over a 6-month follow-up period. C&E participants reported significantly greater rates of attending an HIV testing appointment, but this was not associated with better risk reduction outcomes. Reporting treatment participation within 2 months after detoxification and self-efficacy to practice safer injection behavior predicted reductions in injection risk behaviors.
This is the Primary Outcomes Paper for CTN-0028. National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network protocol CTN-0028 was designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of osmotic-release methylphenidate (OROS-MPH) compared with placebo for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and the impact on substance treatment outcomes in adolescents concurrently receiving cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for substance use disorders (SUD). The study was a 16-week, randomized controlled multi-site trial of OROS-MPH + CBT versus placebo + CBT in 303 adolescents (aged 13 through 18) meeting DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for ADHD and SUD. Primary outcome measures included the following: for ADHD, clinician-administered ADHD Rating Scale (ADHD-RS), adolescent informant; for substance use, adolescent-reported days of use in the past 28 days. Secondary outcome measures included parent ADHD-RS and weekly urine drug screens. Analysis of the results found no group differences on reduction in ADHD-RS scores or reduction in days of substance use. Some secondary outcomes favored OROS-MPH, including lower parent ADHD-RS scores at 8 and 16 weeks, and more negative urine drug screens in OROS-MPH compared with placebo.
This is the Primary Outcomes Paper for CTN-0020. Unemployment is associated with negative outcomes both during and after drug abuse treatment. Interventions designed to increase rates of employment may also improve drug abuse treatment outcomes. The purpose of this multi-site clinical trial, protocol CTN-0020, was to evaluate the Job Seekers' Workshop (JSW), a three-session, manualized program designed to train patients in the skills needed to find and secure a job. Study participants were recruited through the National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network (CTN) from six psychosocial counseling (n=327) and five methadone maintenance (n=301) drug treatment programs. Participants were randomly assigned to either standard care (program-specific services plus brochure with local employment resources) (SC) or standard care plus JSW. Three 4-h small group JSW sessions were offered weekly by trained JSW facilitators with ongoing fidelity monitoring. JSW and SC participants had similar 12- and 24-week results for the primary outcome measure (i.e., obtaining a new taxed job or enrollment in a training program). Specifically, one-fifth of participants at 12 weeks (20.1-24.3%) and nearly one-third at 24 weeks (31.4-31.9%) had positive outcomes, with "obtaining a new taxed job" accounting for the majority of cases.
This is the Primary Outcomes Paper for CTN-0032. This study, National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network protocol CTN-0032, examined the effectiveness of risk reduction counseling and the role of on-site HIV testing in drug treatment. Between January and May 2009, researchers randomized 1281 HIV-negative (or status unknown) adults who reported no past-year HIV testing to (1) referral for off-site HIV testing, (2) HIV risk-reduction counseling with on-site rapid HIV testing, or (3) verbal information about testing only with on-site rapid HIV testing. Two primary self-reported outcomes were defined a priori: receipt of HIV test results and unprotected anal or vaginal intercourse episodes at 6-month follow-up. The combined on-site rapid testing participants received more HIV test results than off-site testing referral participants. At 6 months, there were no significant differences in unprotected intercourse episodes between the combined on-site testing arms and the referral arm, or the 2 on-site testing arms.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0001 and CTN-0002.The clinical effectiveness of buprenorphine-naloxone (bup-nx) and clonidine for opioid detoxification in inpatient and outpatient community treatment programs was investigated in the first studies of the National Institute of Drug Abuse Clinical Trials Network. DESIGN: DSM-IV-diagnosed opioid-dependent individuals seeking short-term treatment were randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio favoring bup-nx, to a 13-day detoxification using bup-nx or clonidine. A total of 113 inpatients (77 bup-nx, 36 clonidine) and 231 outpatients (157 bup-nx, 74 clonidine) participated. Supportive interventions included appropriate ancillary medications and standard counseling procedures defined as the proportion of participants in each condition who were both retained in the study for the entire duration and provided an opioid-free urine sample on the last day of clinic attendance. Secondary outcome measures included use of ancillary medications, number of side effects reported and withdrawal and craving ratings. A total of 59 of the 77 (77%) inpatients assigned to the bup-nx condition achieved the treatment success criterion compared to 8 of the 36 (22%) assigned to clonidine, whereas 46 of the 157 (29%) outpatients assigned to the bup-nx condition achieved the treatment success criterion, compared to 74 (5%) assigned to clonidine.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0006. Contingency management interventions that provide tangible incentives based on objective indicators of drug abstinence are efficacious in improving outcomes in substance abusers, but these treatments have rarely been implemented in community-based settings. The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of an abstinence-based contingency management intervention as an addition to usual care in community treatment settings. A total of 415 cocaine or methamphetamine users beginning outpatient substance abuse treatment were randomly assigned to usual care or usual care plus abstinence-based incentives for 12 weeks. All participants received standard care, and those assigned to the abstinence-based incentive condition also earned chances to win prizes for submitting substance-free urine samples; the chances of winning prizes increased with continuous time abstinent. Participants assigned to the abstinence-based incentive condition remained in treatment for a mean +/- SD of 8.0 +/- 4.2 weeks and attended a mean +/- SD of 19.2 +/- 16.8 counseling sessions compared with 6.9 +/- 4.4 weeks and 15.7 +/- 14.4 sessions for those assigned to the usual care condition (P.02 for all). Participants in the abstinence-based incentive condition also submitted significantly more stimulant- and alcohol-free samples (P.001). The abstinence-based incentive group was significantly more likely to achieve 4, 8, and 12 weeks of continuous abstinence than the control group, with odds ratios of 2.5, 2.7, and 4.5, respectively. However, the percentage of positive samples submitted was low overall and did not differ between conditions.
This is the Primary Outcomes Article for CTN-0005. Despite recent emphasis on integrating empirically validated treatment into clinical practice, there are little data on whether manual-guided behavioral therapies can be implemented in standard clinical practice and whether incorporation of such techniques is associated with improved outcomes. The effectiveness of integrating motivational interviewing (MI) techniques into the initial contact and evaluation session was evaluated in a multisite randomized clinical trial. Participants were 423 substance users entering outpatient treatment in five community-based treatment settings, who were randomized to receive either the standard intake/evaluation session at each site or the same session in which MI techniques and strategies were integrated. Clinicians were drawn from the staff of the participating programs and were randomized either to learn and implement MI or to deliver the standard intake/evaluation session. Independent analyses of 315 session audiotapes suggested the two forms of treatment were highly discriminable and that clinicians trained to implement MI tended to have higher skill ratings. Regarding outcomes, for the sample as a whole, participants assigned to MI had significantly better retention through the 28-day follow-up than those assigned to the standard intervention. There were no significant effects of MI on substance use outcomes at either the 28-day or 84-day follow-up.
This is the primary outcomes article for CTN-0027. Buprenorphine/naloxone (BUP) and methadone (MET) are efficacious treatments for opioid dependence, although concerns about a link between BUP and drug-induced hepatitis have been raised. This study, National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network protocol CTN-0027 (Starting Treatment with Agonist Replacement Therapies (START)), was a randomized controlled trial of 1269 opioid-dependent participants seeking treatment at 8 federally licensed opioid treatment programs and followed up for 32 weeks between May 2006 and August 2012. Participants were randomly assigned to receive BUP or MET for 24 weeks. Shift table analyses determined how many evaluable participants moved between categories of low and elevated transaminase levels. Predictors of moving from low to high transaminase levels were identified. Results determined that changes in transaminase levels did not differ by medication condition. Baseline infection with hepatitis C or B was the only significant predictor of moving from low to high transminase levels; 9 BUP and 15 MET participants showed extreme liver test elevations and were more likely than those without extreme elevations to have seroconverted to both hepatitis B and C during the study, or to use illicit drugs during the first 8 weeks of treatment. MET participants were retained longer than the BUP participants, however the 24-week retention rates for the BUP group in this study were in the range seen in prior studies. In fact, because of its superior safety profile and excellent clinical responses to BUP in previous studies, BUP could be considered a first line treatment agent, with MET reserved for those who do not respond well to BUP.